- 

Do you know that prior to 1973 the university you applied to could reject your application if you had a disability? Imagine if you wanted to see a movie but needed space for a wheelchair and the theater didn’t offer that space, you would have to turn around and go home. Now imagine you apply for your dream job, but you get turned away as there is no elevator or accessible entryway. Finally, imagine being separated from your peers at your neighborhood school as they don’t teach children who have disabilities.

Not so long ago these situations were very real for millions of people with disabilities who wanted to go to school, work and enjoy a day at the museum or a night at the theatre.

## FROM CHARITY TO INDEPENDENT LIVING

Copyrighted material.

Chapter 2 from "No Pity" by Joseph Shapiro (required reading; below)

Reproduced by permission from Penguin Random House

### The History of Disabled People in America

Throughout most of its history America has been inhospitable to people with disabilities. In colonial America, the settlement of a vast new rural society meant that early colonists put a premium on physical stamina. The early colonies tried to prevent the immigration of those who could not support themselves and would have to rely on state help. People with physical or mental disabilities who were potentially dependent could be deported, forced to return to England.

The nation's attitude softened somewhat during the Revolutionary War. When the Continental Congress paid for up to 50 percent of the pensions of disabled soldiers, it was the first time the federal government helped the states care for their disabled. A system of marine hospitals was established in 1798 to provide for sick and disabled sailors. The Marine Hospital Service would later evolve into the Public Health Service, and in 1922 some of these hospitals became the first Veterans Administration hospitals. The nation's sense of indebtedness to men who became disabled while fighting its wars was to inspire many major disability programs throughout U.S. history.

There are few historical records of disabled people in the early years the new nation. What does exist suggests that many disabled people were able to fit easily into society. Gouverneur Morris, who helped draft the Constitution and was later a U.S. senator from New York, wore a "rough stick" to replace the left leg he lost in a 1780 carriage accident. Stephen Hopkins referred to his cerebral palsy when he signed the Declaration of Independence, saying, "My hand trembles but my heart does not."

Larger colonial towns, reflecting Elizabethan poor laws, had built almshouses for the poor and the physically and mentally disabled. These had continued to grow during the first half of the nineteenth century as the nation's population grew and a simple rural society became industrialized and urbanized. Dorothea Dix, a Boston schoolmistress, led reformers in the 1840s who demanded that the states take control of miserable local almshouses, where adults and children, the disabled and nondisabled, criminals, and those with retardation, epilepsy, and mental illness were all thrown together. Dix had found people with mental illness and retardation "in cages, closets, cellars, stalls, pens! Chained, naked, beaten with rods, and lashed into obedience." The result was that states took over such institutions, built more, and set up specialized facilities for the criminals, disabled, and others who had populated the almshouses. In Congress, at Dix's urging, agreed to break with past practice and to provide federal funding for separate facilities for what were then called the deaf, dumb, and blind and mentally ill. But President Franklin Pierce vetoed the measure, saying that the care of the physically and mentally disabled was not a federal responsibility. Historian John Lenihan noted, "Pierce's veto became a landmark precedent limiting federal intervention in welfare matters for the next half century."

Doctors and educators working with the blind and deaf, following experiments in France, were among the first to understand that disabled people could be integrated into society rather than sent away to institutions. A school for the blind was opened in Baltimore in 1812, and Thomas Hopkins Gallaudet founded his school for the deaf in Hartford in 1817. Samuel Gridley Howe would open the Massachusetts Asylum for the Blind, later the Perkins Institute, in 1832 with a curriculum that paralleled that in other schools. His theory was an early form of "mainstreaming," in which he prepared blind youths to find work and live self-sufficiently in their communities. Howe's success in teaching Laura Bridgman, who had been left blind, deaf, and unable to speak by an attack of scarlet fever when she was two, brought visitors such as Charles Dickens and American educators, and with them a recognition that reformers were right that people who were both blind and deaf could be educated. This success also encouraged Howe to open the first state school to try to train "idiots and feebleminded youth" in 1848. The work of Howe, Dr. Hervey Wilbur, and others showed that mental retardation could not be cured, as they had hoped. Nor could people with retardation be easily educated. As a result, these schools became more custodial in their care than were the schools for the blind and the deaf. As historian Lenihan noted, however, "If the gap with the mainstream of society was not closed, at least retardation was no longer considered an incurable disease tantamount to insanity."

The Civil War forced the nation, for the first time, to deal with large numbers of physically disabled citizens. The South, because of heavy casualties and poor medical care in the Confederate Army, was particularly hard hit. Mississippi, in 1886, spent 20 percent of its state revenue on artificial arms and legs. In the North, a National Home for disabled Union soldiers was established in 1866. The rise of orthopedic medicine began to develop partly in response to the returning Civil War wounded. But, as historian David J. Rothman writes in The Discovery of the Asylum, the American reformers' experiments with institutionalization were falling apart by the 1850s, a trend that was exacerbated by the added demands of the Civil War.

These institutions continued to grow, but, losing their grounding in charity, they became places of abuse, isolation, and segregation. The rise of social Darwinism and the eugenics movement at the end of the nineteenth century-two related schools of social thought that challenged whether it was even desirable to have a society with disabled people-brought new hostility.

As the new century opened, Washington, for the first time, was to play an extensive role in welfare. Once again, returning disabled war veterans stirred the nation's sense of obligation. Medical advances, including the development of new medicines, allowed far higher rates of survival for people who became disabled. Nowhere was that more evident than in the returning World War I veterans. So many, who would have died before, returned with disabilities that Washington was forced to establish the Veterans Bureau in 1921 to deal with their needs. Adding to a new national awareness of disability-fed by muckraking journalists and labor unions-was the rise of industrial accidents. Congress passed major rehabilitation programs in 1918 and 1920, guaranteeing federal funds for vocational training and job counseling. Charitable groups also set up employment bureaus for the disabled, including the American Red Cross. A 1921 law established child and maternal health centers to reduce the nation's infant and maternal mortality rate. This would lead to a broader federal role following the Depression. In 1935, Franklin D. Roosevelt signed the Social Security Act, which, for the first time, created a program of permanent assistant to disabled adults.

Roosevelt became the country's most famous disabled person. Americans admired his battle with polio. They sent money to the March of Dimes, which he helped found, and schoolchildren even sent their dimes to build him a White House pool for exercise. Historian Hugh Gregory Gallagher notes, however, in FDR's Splendid Deception, that Roosevelt went to great lengths to hide the extent of his handicap. Roosevelt could not walk, although Americans held a contrary impression. "The generally accepted line was that FDR had had polio and was now a bit lame; he had been paralyzed, but now he was recovered. He was a 'cured cripple: "writes Gallagher. He was never seen in public, nor photographed in private, in his wheelchair. This was still possible in an era before television. He, his son, and Secret

Service agents had devised elaborate ways to get him in and out of buildings. If he had to enter in public view, his son and agents would walk closely by his side, and FDR would lift himself on their arms, as if he were a gymnast on parallel bars. He would seem to be walking although he was, in effect, being carried. Washington was a wheelchair-accessible city--or at least the parts frequented by FDR-with ramps at the White House, Capitol, the War, State and Navy Building, and St. John's Church across Lafayette Square. It would be another thirty years before such access was required by law.

Once again, disabled soldiers returning from war, this time World War II, spurred another expansion of federal rehabilitation programs. There was renewed national dedication to helping this most highly visible population of disabled Americans. The Paralyzed Veterans of America formed in 1946 to promote their medical care~ and the President's Committee on Employment of the Handicapped was founded the following year to convince business of its obligation to hire them once they left rehabilitation. Most important, however, was the creation of rehabilitation medicine during World War II by Drs. Howard Rusk and Henry Kessler. Working independently, these men set up rehabilitation centers that worked on a revolutionary idea. They would go well beyond acute care to put together all the medical services-from physical therapy to occupational therapy - that a newly disabled person required to return to a normal life. The independent living movement that Roberts created twenty years later was both an improvement on this and a rebellion from it. The independent living movement endorsed physiatry's ground-breaking emphasis on looking at the whole person, but it rejected the medical model that could view that person only as a patient, in the context of a medical setting.

For the most part, it was government or charitable groups that helped people with disabilities, but there were a few scattered cases of disabled people rising up on their own. Deaf and blind people had been the first to set up national advocacy organizations, beginning in the last two decades of the nineteenth century. Such groups proved effective. Blind relief laws, providing special financial assistance, were enacted in twenty seven states in the 1920s and early 1930s. But when economic times were good, others argued that to take special assistance only furthered perceptions that blind and deaf people were incapable of living without charity. Robert Irwin, the blind Harvard-educated man who led the American Foundation of the Blind through its early years in the 1920S and 1930S, promoted self-reliance and opposed automatic pensions or special schools for the blind.

Disabled people turned to civil disobedience for the first time during the Depression. Historian Paul Longmore tracked down the lost story of the short-lived League for the Physically Handicapped, a group of three hundred disabled New York pensioners--most with polio and a few with cerebral palsy who occupied the Works Progress Administration offices in Washington to protest that they were being routinely rejected for WPA jobs. Another important self-help group started in 1958 when Gini Laurie, who volunteered with patients on a Cleveland polio ward, started the Toomey j Gazette as an "alumni" newsletter for people leaving the hospital. Soon people were writing in with tips about how they took care of a baby from a wheelchair, managed on a trip to France, or started their own mail-order business working at home over the telephone. The newsletter turned into a journal of se1f-reliance--today it is the Rehabilitation Gazette-and soon won a worldwide readership, including a young Ed Roberts in California.

But it was the rise of a parents' movement that would most change the course of disability policy in the years following World War II. A proliferation of new disability groups like the United Cerebral Palsy Associations, founded in 1948, and the Muscular Dystrophy Association in 1950 were started by parents. As more children survived disability, more parents sought to keep them from being institutionalized. They realized they shared their struggle with other parents who were also frustrated by the paltry support offered by doctors or social service agencies. Their biggest common concern was to get their children educated. These new parents' groups took their case to Congress, which, in 1966, created a federal bureau for the handicapped. The groups sent permanent lobbyists to Washington, and in 1970 the bureau began providing funds for training special education teachers and developing separate materials for teaching the children in these classes.

#### Reading Reflection Question: What role did wars have in advancing disability rights in America?

In the fall of 1962, James Meredith, escorted to class by U.S. marshals, integrated the University of Mississippi.

That same school season, a postpolio quadriplegic named Ed Roberts entered the University of California at Berkeley. Just as surely as Meredith ushered in an era of access to higher education for blacks and a new chapter in the civil rights movement, Roberts was more quietly opening a civil rights movement that would remake the world for disabled people. The disability rights movement was born the day Roberts arrived on the Berkeley campus.

While Roberts's activism would be shaped by Berkeley, it was first formed in the experiences of being disabled as a teenager - after growing up with all the promises of a full life that are the birthright of the nondisabled. In 1953, polio swept through the modest frame home of Verne Roberts, a second generation railroad worker, his wife, Zona, and their four sons. Health authorities quarantined the Robertses' house in Burlingame, a working-class town twenty miles south of San Francisco. Everyone would recover from the virus except for fourteen-year-old Ed, the oldest child. He had been a playground rat. He had played quarterback on the football team. He had shagged flies for Billy Martin, the New York Yankees infielder who returned home to northern California in the off-season. Now Roberts, unable to move more than his head or even breathe on his own; hovered near death in a hospital.

Roberts spent the first year of his illness in a dreary county hospital, confined to bed, never allowed to sit up in a wheelchair. Because the muscles that worked his lungs had been paralyzed, he could not breathe for long on his own. He spent eighteen hours a day in an eight-hundred-pound iron lung. It was yellow, alien looking, and as big as a telephone booth. He lay on his back in the tank, which enclosed his entire body except his head. The lung chamber created positive pressure from a bellows powered by a small electric motor. The uniform pressure over his chest, thorax, and abdomen forced Roberts to inhale air through his mouth. The machine became the boundary of his childhood. During the day, he could go up to six hours outside the lung by "frog breathing," swallowing deep gasps of air to fill his lungs.

Roberts saw himself as a "helpless cripple" overwhelmed by depression, powerlessness, and self-hatred. He asked his parents if he would ever go to college, marry, or hold a job. The answer, based on what doctors, nurses, and counselors had said, was always no. It would have been more humane, a doctor had told his mother, if the high fever of the polio had killed him quickly. Instead, the doctor said, Roberts would live as a sickly "vegetable" for the rest of his life. Roberts had no reason to think that the doctors were wrong. His decision was to attempt suicide by refusing food, in defiance of his private-duty nurse. His weight plummeted from 120 pounds to 50 pounds in seven months. The day the nurse left, he started to eat again. It was his first act of self-empowerment, albeit a subconscious one. No one would tell his "helpless cripple" when and what to eat. He would decide for himself.

After twenty months of hospitals, he moved back to his room in the house in Burlingame. The iron lung moved with him. Roberts attended school, via telephone. His new classmates (he was now two years behind) sat at attention at their desks at school. Roberts, isolated, listened over the phone, often while lying in the iron lung. When students answered a question, they would pass around the microphone to speak to the classmate they had never Seen. Before his illness, Roberts had been, at best, an indifferent student. Homework was boring. He had been slow to learn to read. But from his iron lung, he realized that education would be his power. His mind, he knew, was the one thing that had not been weakened by the illness. As he got healthier, there was no reason--other than his own embarrassment-to keep him from school. He returned, in a wheelchair, for his senior year of high school.

Shy and ashamed of his crippled body, he had rarely ventured outside his home. Over time, he had come to accept his disability, which now was central to his identity. Some regarded him as a freak in a wheelchair, the poor boy in the machine. Yet he had proved wrong all the doomsayers who had thought him better off dead. He had a different life, but it was an okay life. Disproving all those experts had given Roberts a growing sense of his own power. His first day back at school, too, had been a revelation. As he was lifted from the car, he had felt the staring eyes of his schoolmates. Staring was what he had most feared. But the stares that day were not looks of disgust. Those who were discomfited had averted their eyes. Instead, these were stares of fascination and excitement, as if Elvis Presley had suddenly descended upon the school. "It was like being a star," recalls Roberts. "So I decided to be a star, not a helpless cripple."

Despite his good grades, the school principal, a humorless bureaucrat who did everything by the book, refused to give Roberts his diploma because he had not completed the driver's education and gym requirements. The principal got backing from the assistant superintendent of schools, but Zona Roberts fought back. A former labor organizer, she raised hell, complaining all the way up the line to the school board. Finally, at her insistence, Roberts's physical rehabilitation sessions were counted as physical education, the driver's education requirement was dropped, and Roberts got his diploma. For a disabled person growing up, says Roberts, to have "parents willing to fight for you and include you in that fight" is "the most important skill you can learn to be successful." This was an early example of how only harsh attitudes of others, not his own physical shortcomings, would threaten to hold him back.

After high school, Roberts spent two happy years at San Mateo Community College. Thirsting for more education, he planned on applying to the University of California at Los Angeles, one of four U.S. universities at the time that had special programs and accessible campuses for students in wheelchairs. UCLA had set up a disabled students program for disabled World War II veterans. Roberts, as a disabled man, had been thinking practically-in terms of wheelchair access and a school ready to admit him despite his disability. But Jean Wirth, his academic adviser at San Mateo, insisted that he do what any other student would do and set his sights on the best, not the least restrictive, school. She talked him into applying to the University of California at Berkeley, which had a superior reputation in political science, the area Roberts wanted to study.

But California's Department of Rehabilitation refused to pay for his four-year college education, as it did for other, less disabled students. Roberts's counselor, who had a slight limp, ruled that spending money on Roberts would be wasted since it was "infeasible" that he could ever work. San Mateo's president, the dean of students, and Wirth appealed, arguing that Roberts had excelled at the community college and deserved the chance to go on. When they were rebuffed, the school officials took Roberts's case to the local newspaper, and eventually the state agency was forced to relent in the onslaught of negative publicity. Roberts had learned another valuable lesson: the press was willing to champion the cause--even if overdramatically-of a worthy "cripple."

Even then, Roberts still had to convince officials at Berkeley to admit him. "We've tried cripples before and it didn't work" one Berkeley dean explained matter-of-factly to Roberts. Practically speaking, he was correct. The classrooms were not accessible and the library and the cafeterias had steps. But Roberts had sidestepped this problem at San Mateo by relying on attendants or friends to lift him out of his wheelchair and carry him into classrooms. The bigger problem at Berkeley was where to live. No dormitory had floors strong enough to take the weight of the eight-hundred-pound iron lung.

But another thing Roberts had learned was not to stop at the first roadblock. He knew he had to keep searching until he found a sympathetic person who was open to bending the rules. Roberts found one in Dr. Henry Bruyn, the director of student health services. Bruyn offered a solution: Roberts, with his iron lung, could move onto the third floor of the university's Cowell Hospital. Living in the student infirmary ' making it a one-man dormitory, was not exactly the college experience Roberts had in mind. But it was a way onto what had been a closed campus. As Berkeley tried its experiment, a local newspaper wrote about Roberts in a story with the headline HELPLESS CRIPPLE GOES TO SCHOOL.

At Berkeley, Roberts needed someone to push his wheelchair and help him get dressed and eat. Sometimes a friend helped willingly. But for the most part, he hired attendants, including sometimes his brother Ron, also a student at Berkeley. State funding paid for the attendants. California had the nation's first such program. "It wasn't inexpensive, a couple hundred dollars a month," says Roberts. "But as it turns out, it was a real breakthrough." Money, Roberts suspected, had been the real reason it had been deemed "infeasible" for him to attend Berkeley. Education at San Mateo had been inexpensive: he had lived at home in Burlingame and tuition at the junior college was cheap. For a quadriplegic like Roberts, joining the nondisabled world would sometimes require extra spending.

Roberts could stay away from the iron lung for up to several hours at a time. "That was enough time to go to classes and even go out and drink a little," he recalls. Most buildings were accessible, but he had to find back doors and circuitous paths without steps to the elevators. There were innovations to keep up with classwork. He could move the pages of a book, for example, with a stick that he clenched between his teeth. He read while lying on his back in the iron lung. The book slipped into a reading stand on the mirror one foot above his head.

Getting onto a vibrant college campus was a liberation. He had the typical college experiences of the 1960s: he found intellectual discussion exciting, and he experimented with drugs and sex. Each typical college experience pushed him farther. By 1967, Roberts's mother, Zona, had moved to Berkeley to take classes and be near her son. Judy was her neighbor and a student, too. Judy, recently abandoned by the husband she had helped through medical school, and Ed would engage in long discussions of their vulnerability and their feelings of having to fight stereotypes to win opportunities. Soon, their neighborly relationship turned into a romantic one. Roberts was dependent on someone, often his mother or brother, to push him in his wheelchair. A new innovation, a wheelchair powered by a twelve-volt battery, was on the market. But rehabilitation counselors had told Roberts that his weak hands could never manipulate the joystick control. Motivated by love and a need for privacy, however, Roberts learned to navigate one with only an hour and a half of practice. The power wheelchair represented independence. For the first time since the polio, Roberts was free to move when he wished to move, to go where he wished to go, anytime he wanted.

Roberts was alone on the empty wing of Cowell, but word of his experiment traveled quickly. Soon the university began admitting other physically disabled applicants. The first, the following year, was John Hessler, who had heard about Roberts from his physical therapist. A lanky six-foot-seven-inch quadriplegic, Hessler had broken his neck in a diving accident. Roberts, Hessler, and the other disabled students who were soon to join them got caught up in the political upheaval of the times, which burned intensely on the Berkeley campus in the Free Speech Movement, the anti-Vietnam War protests, and other causes. Roberts watched and learned from the civil rights movement and the nascent women's movement. Women rejected that "anatomy was destiny" and were struggling to control their bodies. Disabled people, too, were questioning the medicalization of their lives. Particularly, Roberts noted how feminists used stereotypes about them-as the weaker, milder sex-to their advantage. The women would let their opponents fall into such tired assumptions, then catch them off guard with the force of their anger and the unassailable correctness of their demand for equality. Roberts saw that he, too, could use the charitable and protective instincts of his enemies. When someone saw a severely disabled man and felt compelled to help, Roberts would use that compassion as an opening to blast away at the low expectations, including the assumption that he would never work or could not get around a campus.

Roberts finished his undergraduate degree, got his master's degree in political science, and began work on his doctorate. By 1967 there were twelve severely disabled students living in Cowell. They called themselves the "Rolling Quads." In late night bull sessions on the hospital floor, Roberts and his friends, in their wheelchairs and iron lungs, would strategize constantly about breaking down the common barriers they faced-from classrooms they could not get into to their lack of transportation around town-and dissect the protests for self-determination of minority students.

In 1968, the dormitory became a formal program run by the state department of rehabilitation. When one counselor tried to evict two men from Cowell, complaining about their low grades, the rest of the Rolling Quads rebelled. "She wanted us all to get A's and to carry a certain number of credits," recalls Roberts. Some of the men were moving through Berkeley slowly, either because their disabilities made it hard to study or because they wanted to delay the inevitable departure from this rarest commune of like-minded brothers. But the counselor was threatening to cut off state funding for those who did not follow her instructions. And to justify the eviction of the two men, she brandished the bureaucratic label of "infeasible" for work. "Nobody was going to threaten our independence, or the program itself," says Roberts. So he led a rebellion, petitioning university administrators and appealing to Berkeley's liberal student body. It was unfair, he argued, for the freewheeling campus to apply stricter rules of behavior to a pocket of disabled students. Thinking back to his own fight to get into Berkeley-and then the protest movements he had seen on campus--Roberts put in telephone calls to the local newspapers, radio, and television stations. "We haven't had a villain like this in a long time," one reporter confided to Roberts. Other students at Berkeley offered words of encouragement on the street. Within a few weeks, the counselor was reassigned.

Back in Cowell, the late-night discussion sessions focused on total self-sufficiency. The Rolling Quads wanted to be their own counselors, or case service managers, so they would never again have to kowtow to a bureaucrat who controlled their funding. They needed to know how to get a job on their own, so they would not become dependent on any state program. They talked about whether the know-it-all assumptions of their rehabilitation counselors were motivated by a need to control their clients if for no other reason than to make sure their own jobs did not become obsolete. The Rolling Quads realized that they would have to think of themselves as consumers of state services, not as clients.

The next battle would come the following year, when the city of Berkeley was renovating the main shopping street south of campus. Curb cuts, at that time, were not a standard part of street design. Because their wheelchairs could not ride over five-inch curbs, Roberts and his friends rarely left campus. But eight members of the Rolling Quads showed up at a city council meeting--eight wheelchairs in one room, Rolling Quad Donald Lorence would explain later, is a dramatic statement in itself- and won a commitment of $50,000 a year to ramp city streets. From these seemingly small victories emerged a sense of political power.

#### Reading Reflection Question: How did Roberts challenge barriers to accessibility at Berkeley?

### From Campus Life to Independent Living

It was about this time that the idea of living in Cowell began to get stale. Residing in a hospital still stigmatized the Rolling Quads; they were students by day and patients by night. And that was exactly the image they wanted to erase. Despite their polio or spinal cord injuries, they were as healthy as other students on campus. The original idea was to find an expansive communal house off campus, but some members balked. Independence meant having choices about where to live and not needing to live always with other wheelchair users. They could not, after all, spend their entire lives together as part of some sort of disability frat house. Yet, finding apartments that could be made accessible would be a herculean task. Two students had already tried to move out of Cowell, but only one had succeeded in finding a wheelchair-accessible apartment. The other had returned to Cowell, discouraged. Nevertheless, with their new sense of collective power, the Rolling Quads began planning to set up a support group to help each other live independently. An important break would come from an old Roberts connection: Jean Wirth, his counselor at San Mateo. Wirth had started a program there to cut down on the high rate of black and Hispanic dropouts. Traditionally, dropping out was seen as an academic problem. But Wirth understood that often, particularly with her minority students, it was the problems of everyday living that led to school failure. So Wirth asked other students to be peer mentors. If a minority student was about to quit because he or she had no transportation to school, the mentor arranged a carpool. If the student could not afford school, the mentor helped find a job. Wirth's College Readiness Program worked so well that a federal education official asked her to come to Washington to try to replicate the program on a national level. In 1966, at Wirth's request, Roberts flew to Washington to help her write provisions to include disabled students among the listed minorities.

Wirth and Roberts specified that the disabled students' anti dropout programs were to be run by disabled people whenever possible. Since this provision was little known and there were only a handful of other schools with special programs for disabled students, the Rolling Quads were virtually assured that their grant proposal to Washington would be received favorably. The Department of Health, Education and Welfare speedily approved $81,000, and the university kicked in $2,000. By the fall of 1970, the Physically Disabled Students' Program, or PDSP, as it was known, was open for business in a newly ramped office on campus.

Roberts and his colleagues drew on their own experiences to figure out what was needed to live independently. In essence, PDSP was Wirth's antidropout program for minorities, but it was applied to disabled students. The PDSP hired disabled counselors who would scope out available and accessible apartments for people in wheelchairs. They put together a pool of potential attendants, who would help prepare meals, push wheelchairs, and do whatever else was needed to help the students. In Berkeley, where people came for the countercultural life-style, it was easy to find attendants who would work odd hours, even if the job was often difficult.

Wheelchairs were a major obstacle to independence. They had been invented for people living at home or in institutions. They had not been constructed sturdily enough for the vanguard of radicals who were redefining what it meant to be paraplegics and quadriplegics by zipping around the spread-out Berkeley campus. Consequently, Roberts and his friends found that their wheelchairs broke down frequently, an event that could keep a student out of classes for weeks. So PDSP set up its own wheelchair workshop, staffed twenty-four hours a day by the self-taught band of wheelchair wizards, who were soon tinkering with their own designs for a better, stronger wheelchair. Others would learn the latest designs to modify cars and vans so that those unable to use their legs could work the brake and gas pedals with their hands. The Rolling Quads also ran PDSP's advocacy department, walking students through the maze of red tape and bureaucracy that accompanied attendant-care funding and other benefits and services.

The student program was radical. The medical model of disability measured independence by how far one could walk after an illness or how far one could bend his legs after an accident. But Roberts redefined independence as the control a disabled person had over his life. Independence was measured not by the tasks one could perform without assistance but by the quality of one's life with help. The health care system offered only custodial help. Roberts rejected this in favor of innovative self-help and group organizing. Disabled people themselves, the newly christened "independent living movement" assumed, knew better than doctors and professionals what they needed for daily living. And what disabled people wanted most of all was to be fully integrated in their communities, from school to work.

Independence. Self-sufficiency. Mainstreaming. Disability as a social problem. These were the principles that guided the PDSP and the disability rights movement of which PDSP was the leading edge. As the program grew, it soon became clear that, the fight for rights had to embrace a wide range of disabilities. Traditionally, various disability groups worked separately for their own members, with little sense of common purpose. Even, the Berkeley program was for "physically" disabled students and was run by people in wheelchairs. But shortly after it opened, PDSP started getting requests from blind students who saw the similarities in their own struggles for independence. The attendant referral service, for example, was expanded easily to include a pool of readers for the blind. It was not lost on Roberts, who was studying community organizing, that political power expanded with coalition building.

When the PDSP started, John Hessler, Berkeley's second quadriplegic, had gone off to France to study. But Roberts wrote an airmail letter asking him to head the new students' program. Hessler understood that something big was starting and wanted to be part of it. He returned to Berkeley, even buying a modified van. It was common for paraplegics to drive cars and vans with brakes and gearshifts they could move with their hands and arms. But even for a grand thinker like Roberts, the sight of a quadriplegic like Hessler, with his limited arm strength, moving such levers, was mind-boggling. Hessler's driving was so impressive that he would show off his van to new disabled students the program was trying to recruit.

There had been a few other college programs for disabled students. The University of Illinois had been the first, setting up a similar but less ambitious program in 1950 to help disabled veterans returning from World War II. By 1961, there were 163 disabled students, 101 in wheelchairs. Students got the campus ramped, had their own fraternity, and published an annual magazine. A fleet of buses equipped with hydraulic lifts made an hourly route around campus and to shopping spots. There were separate wheelchair sports teams, including softball, as well as a cheerleader squad of women in wheelchairs. There were even wheelchair square dances. Although people disabled by polio would eventually go to school there, most at Illinois were less disabled than those at Berkeley, and few of the Rolling Quads would have qualified for the Illinois program, which required students to be able to fend for themselves, without attendants. Nor did the Illinois program-which was run by university officials-incorporate the self-help approach of the Berkeley students.

### The Center for Independent Living

The PDSP in Berkeley was an instant success. A staff of nine full- and part-time workers quickly had a list of one hundred student clients. Disabled students moved out of Cowell quickly and succeeded in school. But from the beginning there was one problem: the nonstop requests for the same help from disabled people who were not students. Staffers at PDSP rarely turned anyone away. But by spring, they found they could not keep up with the needs of the students and others as well. That May, Roberts, Hessler, and the other PDSP leaders got together to discuss how to set up a parallel program for nonstudents. The idea for the Center for Independent Living was born.

Incorporated in the spring of 1972, the Center for Independent Living--or CIL, as it was known-would work on the same principles as the disabled students' program. It would be run by disabled people; approach their problems as social issues; work with a broad range of disabilities; and make integration into the community its chief goal. Independence was measured by an individual's ability to make his own decisions and the availability of the assistance necessary-from attendants to accessible housing-to have such control. Unlike the student program, which had modest resources, CIL operated on a shoestring. The student program donated office space-a large closet-supplies, and some secretarial help. A door balanced on a small table became the center's desk. Roberts, cofounder Phil Draper, and others put aside 10 percent of the pot of their occasional Friday night poker games to keep the center running. A donated Volkswagen van became the center's transportation program. People in wheelchairs could not get onto city buses or into taxis. The van took them to jobs or around town to shop or play. Crucial grants came from Washington and the university. But the money would stop and start the first few years, at times forcing the center to shut down until the next grant came in.

Roberts took over as head of CIL in February 1974, a job he held for eighteen months. He had left Berkeley briefly to teach community organizing to black residents of East Palo Alto. Like Hessler in France, he, too, had felt a gnawing sense of missing something important back on the Berkeley campus. It seemed time to use his expertise as an organizer to help his own people. He started talking more explicitly of disability being a civil rights issue, although there was resistance to drawing such a bold parallel with the problems of black Americans. "We were talking about self-empowerment, self-hatred, and discrimination," Roberts says, "all the same issues." The center's extraordinary new grant writer, Joan Leon, raised a phenomenal $1 million, and the program's financial picture brightened.

Then, in 1975, California's new governor, Jerry Brown—at Roberts's suggestion after he took Brown on a tour of CIL appointed Roberts the director of the state Department of Rehabilitation. Roberts delighted in the irony of being the chief of the agency that a decade and a half earlier had deemed it "infeasible" that he would ever hold a job. Now he was about to be married to Catherine, who had once been his physical therapist. Starting a family-the couple was soon to have a son, Lee – only underscored for Roberts the silliness of a system that tried to write off people based on the severity of their disability.

Roberts set about altering the California rehabilitation system. Like CIL, the Department of Rehabilitation drew on a variety of services. Funding to these agencies was based on how many people were placed into jobs, something that was easy to measure. This, Roberts complained, forced a practice called "creaming." Rehabilitation counselors tended to help those with the most minor disabilities. Severely disabled people-like Roberts- were written off as too hard to help into jobs. Roberts had responded to this by setting up CIL, which had "independent living," a more vague and hard-to-measure outcome, as its goal. When Roberts assumed his post, he merged the seemingly contradictory principles of independent living and rehabilitation services. He expanded funding for attendants to help disabled people with the things they needed for daily living, from eating to dressing. In California, every disabled person was to be helped, no matter how severe the disability. Although the department under Roberts would reach out to more disabled people, federal funding formulas were still based on the number of people placed in jobs, and the debate over creaming continues to this day. Roberts's reforms turned the department upside down, and many employees quit, bitter about the change. But many, to Roberts's surprise, also realized that deemphasizing numbers and concentrating on quality was the proper direction. Their director's own unexpected success served as testament to the error of lowering expectations for the most severely disabled.

Berkeley was not the only place where the lessons of civil rights and student protest were shaping a new generation of disability activists. In the spring of 1970, one year after she graduated from college, Judy Heumann was denied a license to teach in New York City's public schools. She fought her exclusion and emerged as another powerful disability rights leader. Heumann, like Roberts, was a quadriplegic, the result of polio. Hers had struck when she was eighteen months old, so, unlike Roberts, she never had a sense of self-identity without being disabled. Heumann was the eldest of three children born in Brooklyn to German-Jewish immigrants. A doctor urged Werner Heumann, a butcher, and his wife, Ilsa, to put the child in an institution. Relatives told the couple that their misfortune must have been the result of some horrible sin on their part. Later, the local elementary school principal deemed the young girl in a wheelchair a "fire hazard" and for three years sent a teacher to give her home instruction twice a week for a little over an hour each visit.

But Heumann's mother, with a Jewish immigrant's respect for learning, knew this was not a real education. Besides, her daughter was isolated and not making friends. Ilsa Heumann became a battler, emboldened by small victories, who fought to get Judy into a regular school. At first Judy went to a special elementary school for disabled children-where she realized that the parents of many of her classmates had low expectations for their children and that the teachers, when not prodded by pushy parents, responded accordingly. It was a city policy that when children in wheelchairs reached high school age they would return to their families for home instruction. Ilsa Heumann asked the March of Dimes, where she had done volunteer work for years, to help. But the charity's officials declined, saying they wanted to stay out of politics. Banding together with other parents, Ilsa Heumann brought enough pressure on the school board that it reversed the policy. Judy Heumann entered high school in 1961, a time she remembers for the parallel efforts of black Americans to force their way into closed institutions.

Heumann would pick up her mother's zest for battle. She was accepted at Long Island University, an urban school in the middle of Brooklyn. There she led her own battles, forced to insist on everything from the right to live in a dormitory to getting someone to lift her wheelchair over the steps to the classroom buildings. She organized other disabled students to fight for ramped buildings. She took part in protests against the Vietnam War as well.

Heumann studied speech therapy with the goal of helping elementary school children. But she was denied her teaching certificate, despite passing the oral and written parts of the exam, when she flunked the medical exam. The testing physician questioned whether she could get to the bathroom by herself or help children out of the building in an emergency.

Heumann quickly slapped the Board of Education with a lawsuit, charging discrimination. Then she went to the local newspapers, which were happy to tell the story of a qualified teacher up against a coldhearted bureaucracy. "You Can Be President, Not Teacher, with Polio," said the New York Daily News in a headline. "We're not going to let a hypocritical society give us a token education and then bury us," Heumann angrily told the newspaper. When it became clear that the board would likely lose its case, it settled out of court, and Heumann was given her certification. Yet no one would hire her, until the principal of the elementary school she had attended in Brooklyn offered her a job.

The experience taught Heumann that she would always have to fight for her rights. Even then, attitudes would still be barriers. But as a result of the press coverage, Heumann received hundreds of letters, largely from others with disabilities with similar complaints. From the base of those contacts--and ones with disabled friends from special summer camp and from college -- Heumann in 1970 started her own disability rights group, Disabled in Action. She was twenty-two.

Unlike Roberts's organizing in California, Heumann's DIA would be explicitly political and it did not provide direct services to help disabled people live independently. Instead, it engaged in political protest. In 1972, DIA traveled to Washington to demonstrate at the Lincoln Memorial after President Richard Nixon vetoed a spending bill to fund disability programs. Then, in the closing days of the presidential election, Heumann joined with a group of disabled Vietnam veterans to take over Nixon's New York reelection headquarters to demand, militantly if unrealistically, an on-camera debate with the president himself.

The following year, summoned by Roberts, Heumann moved to Berkeley to work at CIL. California was a revelation. She was picked up at the airport in a friend's van with a hydraulic lift. She could get the state to pay for her personal attendant. In the growing West, she could find newer buildings that had been made accessible. Most of all, she found disabled people who had come together in a common group identity. From 1975 through 1982, Heumann would serve as the deputy director of CIL, blending her East Coast political activism with the Berkeley disability community's focus on providing independent living services. In California, Heumann, along with Roberts, would continue to rewrite the history of the disabled. 

Remembering Judy Heumann's Lasting Contributions to Disability Rights (required video; In her words, 3:50 min video)

#### Reading Reflection Question: What did the Independent Living Movement accomplish?

## Willowbrook Exposed

            A major case that influenced the legal rights of people with disabilities living with dignity arose when the Willowbrook State Developmental Center in New York was exposed in 1972. Willowbrook was labeled as a state-supported school for children and adults with developmental and intellectual disabilities. The facility ran from 1947 until 1987 and was designed for 4,000 residents. However, by 1965, the population grew to 6,200, making it the biggest state-run institution for people with developmental and intellectual disabilities in the United States. Residents at Willowbrook experienced a wide range of disabilities and each required individual interventions and specialized care. However, major overcrowding, a lack of staff, resources and funding caused Willowbrook to function as Willowbrook physician William Bronston described, as a ”human warehouse.” These conditions enabled rampant abuse, dehumanization, public health crises and overall dangerous conditions for residents. Residents, who were mostly children, were unsupervised for hours and did not receive support to fulfill their basic needs. They had no privacy nor protection from theft, assault or injury; were confined to small spaces; did not receive adequate clothing, meals or toileting facilities; were covered in their own feces and urine; were confined to beds or chairs. Residents received no education, therapy, rehabilitation, assessments to monitor progress, structured activities to fill their time and had very little interaction with staff. Unhygienic conditions lead to widespread disease, such as skin rashes, measures and hepatitis. In fact, hepatitis affected so many residents that researchers intentionally exposed residents to the deadly virus (without their consent) in order to test the efficacy of new vaccines at Willowbrook.

            In 1965, Senator Robert Kennedy visited the institution and described thousands of residents “living in filth and direct, their clothing and rags, in rooms less comfortable and cheerful than the cages in which we put animals in the zoo.” In response, the New York State Government agreed to develop a five-year plan to improve the conditions. However, no major changes occurred.

            In 1972, two physicals at Willowbrook, William Bronston and Michael Wilkins, connected with print journalist Jane Kurtain and investigative reporter Geraldo Rivera to expose the conditions at Willowbrook. The journalists visited Willowbrook with a film crew unannounced to document daily life there. Rivera recalled his experience, “the doctor warned me it would be bad; it was horrible … how can I tell you about the way it smelled? It smelled of filth, it smelled of disease, and it smelled of death.” Rivera produced an expose: Willowbrook: The Last Disgrace (the actual expose that exposed Willowbrook; optional; 27 min), which spurred parent advocates to push for change in federal court.

Watch this video to learn more about people's lived experiences at Willowbrook: The Path Forward: Remembering Willowbrook (required video; 27 min).

### The Willowbrook Lawsuit

After the Willowbrook exposé was released, parents of residents at Willowbrook filed a class action lawsuit in the U.S. District Court alleging that the conditions at Willowbrook violated the constitutional rights of its residents. The lawsuit sought immediate changes: hiring more staff, providing appropriate medical care, prohibiting the use of seclusion, physical and chemical restraints, and providing adequate clothing and food for residents.

            In April 1973, U.S. District Court Judge Orrin G. Judd found that the conditions in Willowbrook violated the constitutional right of persons living in state custodial institutions to be protected from harm and granted much of the requested injunctive relief, including prohibiting the use of seclusions and restraints, increasing medical, therapeutic and recreational staffing, requiring maintenance, and requiring regular progress reports. On April 30, 1975, Judge Judd The case was signed the Willowbrook Consent Judgment: New York State Association For Retarded Children (required, but can skim), Inc., et al., v. Hugh L. Carey, 393 F. Supp. 715 (1975).

The political reaction to this case led to the creation of legislation such as:

- The Protection and Advocacy (P&A) System in the Developmental Disabilities Assistance and Bill of Rights Act (optional to review; 1975)

- The Education for All Handicapped Children Act P.L. 94-142 (optional to review; 1975; the precursor to the Individuals with Disabilities Education Act, the current law that governs special education in the U.S.)

- The Civil Rights of Institutionalized Persons Act (optional to review; CRIPA, 1980)

As more families were choosing to raise their children with significant disabilities at home, there became an increasing demand for better living options once these children grew into adulthood.  Families of children with disabilities recognized that their children deserved to be living in the community, much like their children without disabilities. These families were instrumental in setting the stage for the Independent Living movement in the United States.

Independent Living can be categorized on the premise that people with disabilities should be able to live in the same kinds of living situations that people without disabilities live in, given the appropriate support. In the text, A History of Independent Living, you can read more about how the Independent Living movement came into being for people with disabilities. 

A History of Independent Living (required; McDonald & Oxford, 2005)

Despite the push to have more people with disabilities living in their own communities, some individuals with disabilities were still being placed into residential institutional living situations.  The Olmstead Case and Decision (learn more about this in Module 3!) was important in creating a legal foundation to allow persons with disabilities to live in community-based residential programs.

## After reviewing this week's content, please complete: 

Week 2 Discussion Board and Assignment 2
